once around Uranus.
So we'll start here with this map of the
solar system. The view that was common
in the times of people like Capernicus
with the sun at the center and of course
Newton with his law of gravity. The
planets moving around the sun and then
going all the way out. Mercury, Venus,
Earth, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. And
then leading to the realm of the fixed
stars beyond. And all that changed in
1781 when this guy came along and was
observing the stars. He was a fantastic
telescope maker. The one in the image
there is his 40ft telescope, which came
later. He wasn't using that one. and he
was using this one, a small 6 and 1/2 in
reflector that he'd built himself.
Observing from the back garden at 19 New
King Street in Bath, he noted in the
quartile near Zeta Tori either a
nebulous star or perhaps a comet. and he
wrote to the Royal Society and described
how he had first seen the comet with a
magnification of 227,
which is quite a high power for a small
telescope, and then pushed it to 460 or
even 932 times, finding that the object
got larger with the higher power. And
fixed stars don't do that. They're so
far away that they look like a point,
even with enormously high magnification.
So he knew there was something strange,
but his letters show that what he
thought he'd found was a comet.
So on the 23rd of April,
Neville Masculine, the Royal astronomer
from Greenwich, wrote back to Hershel
and pointed out that he didn't know what
it was, but he thought it would be
probably a new planet, a regular planet
moving in an orbit circularly around the
sun. not like a comet, not in a long
ellipse and certainly no coma or tail
visible which was a distinguishing
feature of comets. Now this new planet
you can see it with the naked eye just
magnitude about 5.8
six being the limit and
binoculars will find it if you know what
you're looking for. It's hard to tell it
from an ordinary star. And there because
there are so many of these fifth and
sixth magnitude stars around. The color
is a giveaway. A pale green disc,
but it is quite hard to see. With a
reasonable size amateur telescope, you
can whack up the magnification and it
certainly then stands out. Uh but of
course the field of view goes down. So,
it's uh hard to know that you're in the
right place before you do that. So, I
would say this is not an easy thing to
find, but it is worth trying to have a
look for it if you have the equipment.
Now, it turns out that prior to Hersel's
observation, several people had actually
seen this object and misidentified it as
just an ordinary star. Even Hippocus
back in 128 BC had written it up in his
catalog of stars and that data was then
noted down by Tommy into the Almagust
and uh recorded and we can see that in
the documents that we have today and it
talks of a four star pattern a
quadrilateral of stars in the
constellation of Virgo.
And when we look now, there are only
three of that brightness in that
location. And mapping backwards with our
uh very accurate planetarium software,
we can see that Uranus was actually in
that location in April of 128 BC. So it
seems that in fact Heparos had spotted
it, but not known it for what it was.
Quite an achievement. No telescopes.
However, later on,
the first royal astronomer, John
Flamstead, observed Uranus six times in
the 1690 era, cataloging it as a star,
34 Tori. James Bradley observed it three
times in 1748,50, and 53 to Bias Mayor
in 1756.
and Pierre Charles Lemonier saw it at
least 12 times between 1750 and 1769,
including on four consecutive nights.
So, it wasn't like Hershel was the first
person to see it, but he was the first
person to recognize it. Perhaps because
he was able to use his telescopes at
much higher magnifying power and
therefore recognized that this was not a
star.
Now, it took 70 years to figure out what
we were going to call this new planet.
Hershel suggested Georgium Cidius in
honor of King George of England. Um, but
of course, nobody outside of England
wanted it named after an English king.
Various people suggested planet Hershel,
naming it after the discoverer. Other
names like Neptune, Astria, and Manurva
from mythology were put forward.
But uh based upon its location beyond
Saturn, we had a couple that sort of
followed that theme. Hyper Cronius and
Trans Saturnis. Transatis for beyond
Saturn. Hyper Cronius because Kronos is
the Greek
uh name for Saturn which is the Roman
equivalent and up to that point the
planets had been named after Roman
deities.
Well,
nobody could agree but eventually the
idea of Johan Elbert Elbert Ellus.
He actually suggested it in 1782, fairly
early on, but uh it took a long time
before anyone really picked up on the
idea, but it made sense. The father of
Kronos, the grandfather of Zeus, the
greatgrandfather of Aries, Saturn,
Jupiter, and Mars, in other words. So,
it's in the logical sequence going out
Mars, Jupiter, Saturn. You want the
father of Saturn, and that would be
Uranus. Except that's the wrong
mythology.
That's the Greek. So we should have
called it Kais because that is the Roman
name that goes with the Greek Uranus.
Probably would have been better off from
the point of view of all those terrible
jokes. But the name stuck although it
took all the way through to 1850. So a
very long time indeed before the uh Navy
Admiral T nautical almanac
abandoned using Georgium Cidius for it
putting it in its tables of locations.
But I think they were the hold out. It's
the last record of anyone using that
term.
So the seventh planet from the sun
ringing about 20 astronomical units, 20
times as far away from the sun as the
earth is. That's double the distance of
Saturn. It takes 84 years to go round
and that means it's done two and a bit
lapse. It will have done three by April
of 2033.
But that orbit led to problems. By 1821,
tables predicting the position of Uranus
were being published. But no matter what
anyone tried to do, they couldn't make
the predictions of its orbit match the
observations so far and remain matching
as time went forward. And of course that
was picked up by Urbane Leier and John
Cooch Adams. And that led to the
prediction and then the discovery of the
planet Neptune.
So Uranus itself 50,000 km in diameter,
four times the diameter of the Earth and
weighing in at 14.5 nearly 15 times the
mass. So actually for four times the
diameter you would expect four * 4 * 4
which is 64 times the mass if the
density was the same. And this shows
that these large outer planets are in
fact lightweights for their size.
Density 1.26 g per cubic cm. And that's
uh only a little bit more than the
density of water.
You can see it in comparison to this
marvelous picture of Jupiter on the
right there. Um, so in between
and the really odd thing about Uranus is
the tilt of its axis.
Here we have it with the 3° for Jupiter,
27 for Saturn, and 30 for Neptune, which
are all fairly ordinary. Uranus is
tipped right over at 98°. Of course, you
could call that 82 degrees the other way
if you really wanted to. Um, but the
point would be then it would be spinning
the wrong way. It would be a retrograde
spin. Um, so it's tipped right over. And
this is going to make the seasons on uh
Uranus if you could stand on it, which
of course you can't because it's got no
solid surface available.
Very strange indeed. as it goes around
the sun. Sometimes the polar axis is
pointing more or less at the sun,
sometimes it's pointing um sideways on.
And so you would get almost normal
dayight rotation as the planet spins
around. But when the pole's pointing at
the sun, you're either going to get 42
years of uh near continuous sunlight or
42 years of near continuous darkness.
Um, here's a little animation of the
view that we get from the Earth as that
rotation occurs. So, the poles sometimes
point our way and sometimes don't.
Sometimes the rings are fully exposed,
sometimes they edge on to us. And you
can see those rings marked in the brown
there. We'll talk more about those as we
go through. Um, so this is the image
that Voyager 2 sent back in 1986, and
it's pretty boring really. There's just
a faint hint of a cloud towards the
lower part of the image there.
Otherwise, it's fairly featureless, but
using a little bit of infrared and
winding up the contrast, we could see
more detail on the surface there, more
cloud features and the rings. And the
rings were first imaged by Voyager 2.
We had thought that there might be rings
because as Uranus had passed in front of
various stars that the uh light from the
star would normally just wink out as it
disappeared behind the planet and then
pop back again when the planet moved out
of the way. but it flicked on and off as
it was approaching the planet,
suggesting that something was getting in
the way. And the idea was perhaps that
was a ring system. But uh it wasn't
really confirmed until Voyager 2 took
the image. But nowadays, this is what we
get when we point the James Web Space
Telescope at it. The planet's somewhat
overexposed, but you can see that
marvelous
ring system with the inner five rings uh
there and then some further rings moving
further out even that was a new
discovery.
The planet itself internally probably
has a solid metal iron um nickel iron
and silicate rock core overlaying by a
mantle which is described as water
ammonia and methane ices. But we have to
be careful referring to them as ices. We
don't really mean ice. The pressure and
in fact the temperature in there is
quite high. uh there's a lot of heat
trapped in the formation of the planet
and we're talking about a superc
critical phase of the ices which is
almost like a superc critical liquid
perhaps even ionizing the uh material.
So quite strange indeed. Further out
there's an atmosphere which is a mixture
of uh gases like hydrogen, helium and
methane. And then of course we see those
pale colored tinted cloud tops at the
surface. But there is something strange
about Uranus. It is the coldest um
atmosphere cloud tops that we know in
the entire solar system. Colder
definitely than Neptune even though
Neptune is considerably further away
from the sun and probably gets less than
half the heat from the solar radiation.
And we think that this is because of how
it formed.
It seems likely that the tilt of Uranus
was created in a giant but oblique
impact. So another body struck Uranus,
merged with it and tipped the rotation
axis right over, but in the process
stirred up the central part of the
original objects, bringing a lot of the
original heat of formation to the
surface and letting it escape to space.
Whereas Neptune, we think perhaps was
subject to a strike that was much more
headon and the incoming body drilled
into the center and merged with the core
and then a lot of the heat got trapped
in the center. So mixing the interior
but not bringing that uh heat to the
outside.
This is a Voyager 2 animation of the uh
original view from the cloud tops there.
Time-lapse photography. Black and white
obviously. And a lot of those dark rings
are actually dust on the camera lens.
Complicated
cloud structures visible rotating around
it. And as I said, very cold indeed.
Just 49 Kelvin. 49 degrees above
absolute zero.
900 km per hour, 560 mph wind speeds.
It's pretty high, but Neptunes are
higher and variations in the polar cap
and uh somewhat erratic cloud formation
going on in this and in these more
modern ones. The one on the left taken
by radio telescopes, the very large
array out there in the desert in 2021
got in on the act. And radio telescopes
are amazing for the resolution that they
can produce.
And then we have three images from the
Hubble Space Telescope again showing
this uh cyclonic uh weather pattern at
the uh north pole of uh Uranus there
shown in different wave of infrared
light.
I like this photograph because when
Voyager passed Neptune, it found a great
dark spot uh and relatively little on
the surface of um Uranus, but here we
have a dark spot on Uranus as well. So,
showing the similarity between them in
that these dark spots are possible. And
again, that's a an image from the Hubble
Space Telescope with the advanced camera
for surveys doing a great job there.
Now in common with uh many of the other
giant planets there is a magnetic field
but it's very strange because of the
tilt of the orbit and the fact that the
rotation axis is tipped right over the
magnetic field is doing some very
strange girrations indeed. It's
through the planet, not through the
center as shown in the uh graphic to the
right there. It's not parallel. It's 59
degrees of tilt between the magnetic
field and the rotation which is uh
tilted pointing towards the pole and it
misses the center of the planet. It's
offset to one side. So very very
peculiar indeed. but a a powerful
magnetic field trapped and caused uh by
all of that um material. A lot of the
interior of the uh superc critical phase
of the ice is inside the planet is
electrically conducting uh with a lot of
ionized material and that with the
rotation is creating this substantial
magnetic field trapping a lot of charged
particles and even causing aurora. And I
love this picture of a couple of aurora
on the cloud tops of Uranus there.
Now, moons. There are 29 moons of
Uranus, and I thought that they were
interesting enough that they deserved
their own video. So, there is one called
Once around the Moons of Uranus for you
to enjoy talking about the 14 inner
moons, the five major moons, or should
that be six? I'm not sure. Um, and the
10 irregulars. So, go and check that out
if you uh are interested in them. Um,
and I think it's worth it.
Formation of Uranus definitely seems to
be primordial from the original pre-olar
nebula in regions that were less dense
than Jupiter and Saturn. And therefore,
the runaway exponential growth was
lower, resulting in a a smaller object
and being able to pull in less of the
hydrogen and helium. If you're less
massive, you has less gravity. So the
escape of the very lightest gases
becomes possible. Uh but you are able to
hang on to heavier molecules of things
like uh water and uh carbon dioxide,
carbon monoxide, nitrogen,
um methane and ammonia of course. But
the very light gases it's much more
difficult. So being smaller meant that
they were even smaller still, which is
why we have the two very large giants
closer in in a denser part of the
pre-olar nebula.
But there is a little bit of a mystery
and this is a simulation here of the
outer planets of our solar system. It's
a little bit rapid, but it repeats the
first 20 million years of the evolution
of the planetary orbits. The red dots
are the major giant planets. We're not
showing the inner solar system. And the
green dots are the Kiper belt objects
beyond Neptune. And what you can see is
that we start with, and we're just about
to start now, there five giant planets.
And the simulation runs forward and then
there is an interaction between Jupiter
and Saturn and one of the five planets
is ejected.
Actually if you watch very closely you
will see that uh the other two outer
planets what we call Uranus and Neptune
swapped places with each other in the
chaos. And of course, the Kiper belt
objects get scattered into that much
less well organized pattern of uh the uh
little green dots all around the outside
there.
So, only the one spacecraft, Voyager 2,
has been to Uranus and indeed Neptune,
and it's probably going to need another
probe to be sent out. And there is a
possibility the Uranus orbiter probe and
mission has been deemed top priority in
the uh 2023 to 2032
window. And so maybe this craft will get
built and launched and sent on its way
to the outer planets. And what would be
really good idea would be to build two
the same and send one to Uranus and one
to Neptune or indeed make more and send
them elsewhere as well. I I really do
think we should stop making individual
separate spacecraft and build a fleet
and then send send uh standard probes.
You know, Gene Rodenbury in Star Trek,
they always used to drop standard probes
onto the planets, didn't they? seems
like an obvious idea. So, I've just got
a couple of views here of Uranus. A
little tiny dot with the arrow in the
top picture is from Cassini in orbit
around Saturn, viewing Uranus through
Saturn's rings. And then the lower right
there, we've got our moon just in the
process of moving in front of
Uranus and blocking it in a lunar
occultation
uh from November of 2022.
So thanks very much for listening to
Once Around Uranus and do check out the
one about its moons which I've done
separately because actually I felt they
deserve the time. So, thanks very much
for listening and we'll catch you on
another one.